## Programming Assignment 1:  Empirical Study of Sorting Algorithm Efficiency

### Overview

For this assignment, I compared quicksort, mergesort, and selection sort on various files.  

### Structure of Repository

To compile all executables, generate all data, and run all tests, one script can be run:  `./run.sh`

The makefile and c code required to generate all of the data is in `./data_generation/`.  `datagen` generates random data, and `datatrans` produces a sorted and reverse sorted file from an unsorted data file.  

The makefile and c code required to test the sorting algorithms is in `./src/`.  

All of the data can be automatically generated by `./data_generation/generate.sh`; when it is, it is placed in `./data/`.  

The results, including raw results from ./run.sh and my report, can be found in `./results/`

### Usage

`./run.sh` will compile everything, generate the data, and run the tests.  It takes less than 30 seconds to prepare everything and about 10 minutes to get through the first 720 tests (on my laptop at least).  The remaining 90 tests (selection sort on 2MB files) take several hours.  

#### Manual data generation

`./run.sh` runs `./data_generation/generate.sh`.  This script makes sure that the `datagen` and `datatrans` executables are compiled and then checks if `./data/` exists; if not, it fills `./data/` with about 200MBs of files.  The data are identical each time it is run.  

To generate your own files, run `make -C ./data_generation` and use `datagen` to create any number of arbitrarily-sized unsorted data files.  E.g., `.data_generation/datagen 3 1000` creates three files, each with 1000 numbers.  `datagen` produces the same output for the same input - a random seed is hard-coded.  

Each unsorted data file name matches `uns_(\d+)_(\d{3}+).dat`, where the first number is the count of data and the second is the file number.  `./datagen 3 1000` would create three files, named `uns_1000_000.dat`, `uns_1000_001.dat`, and  `uns_1000_002.dat`.  

To produce sorted files, pass each file to `datatrans`, which will create a sorted and reverse sorted file with the same data.  E.g., `./data_generation/datatrans uns_1000_001.dat` would produce `sor_1000_001.dat` and `rev_1000_001.dat`.  

`datagen` and `datatrans` create their files in the current working directory.  

#### Manual testing

`./src/` contains the code for the `tester` executable.  Run `make -C src`.  Run `./src/tester` to see the syntax.  It's long, but it makes it easy to script batches of tests.  Each call to `tester` runs one sorting algorithm on one file type (unsorted, sorted, reverse) over a range of file numbers.  

Specify the directory of the data file(s) you'd like to sort, the type (uns, sor, rev), the size, the range, and the algorithm.  

For example, the call `src/tester ./data rev 100000 5 14 quick` searches `./data/` for the files named `./data/rev_100000_005.dat` through `./data/rev_100000_014.dat` and sorts them using quicksort.  Tack on the word "print" as the last argument to print out all of the numbers before and after sorting to verify the correctness.  

`tester` will check for some errors in the arguments but not all.  An improper call might lead to files not being found or sorting not occurring and will not throw an error or fault.   

#### Interpreting data

`tester` outputs a single line for every sorted file with the file path, the sorting algorithm, and the time in milliseconds.  
E.g., `./data/uns_10000_017.dat  merge  1.475000` indicates that mergesort took 1.475 ms to sort the file indicated.  

Because the output is a single line, it's easy to redirect many `tester` calls to a file and then use `grep` and `cut` to grab results.  
The file `./results/raw` was generated by `run.sh` and contains many of these lines as well as blank separating lines and occasional date/time lines. 

The print option in `tester` disrupts this output.  


